doc/api/index.md, before:

---
title: API Reference
---

# API Reference

This is a guide to FSML's API (Application Programming Interface).

# Structure

The FSML procedures are categorised into several thematic modules:

![FSML has five thematic modules: Basic statistics (STS), hypothesis tests (TST), linear procedures (LIN), non-linear procedures (NLP), and statistical distribution functions (DST). \label{fig:fig1}](../../media/fig/modules.png){ width=40% }

- `STS`: Basic statistics for describing and understanding data (e.g., mean, variance, correlation)
- `TST`: Parametric and non-parametric hypothesis tests (e.g., Mann–Whitney U , analysis of variance)
- `LIN`: Statistical procedures relying heavily on linear algebra (e.g., principal component analysis, ridge regression, linear discriminant analysis)
- `NLP`: Non-linear and algorithmic procedures (e.g., k-means clustering)
- `DST`: Statistical distributions (e.g., Student's t distribution); probability density function (PDF), cumulative distribution function (CDF), and percent point function (PPF)

While the public interfaces do not include these as prefixes, the handbook makes use of these
categories to give it more structure. If you are interested in exploring the code, you will
recognise these in module and procedure names.


# Coverage

The following procedures are currently covered and have a public interface. The links will take you directly to the documentation for the API.

| Basic Statistics (STS)                             |
| -------------------------------------------------- |
| [Mean](./sts.html#fsml_mean)                       |
| [Median](./sts.html#fsml_median)                   |
| [Variance](./sts.html#fsml_var)                    |
| [Standard deviation](./sts.html#fsml_std)          |
| [Covariance](./sts.html#fsml_cov)                  |
| [Linear trend](./sts.html#fsml_trend)              |
| [Correlation (Pearson)](./sts.html#fsml_pcc)       |
| [Correlation (Spearman rank)](./sts.html#fsml_scc) |

<br>

| Statisical Hypothesis Tests (TST)                                     |
| --------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| [Student t-test (1 sample)](./tst.html#fsml_ttest_1sample)            |
| [Paired sample t-test](./tst.html#fsml_ttest_paired)                  |
| [Pooled t-test (2 sample)](./tst.html#fsml_ttest_2sample)             |
| [Welch's t-test (2 sample)](./tst.html#fsml_ttest_2sample)            |
| [Analysis of variance (one way)](./tst.html#fsml_anova_1way)          |
| [Wilcoxon signed-rank (1 sample)](./tst.html#fsml_signedrank_1sample) |
| [Wilcoxon signed-rank (paired)](./tst.html#fsml_signedrank_paired)    |
| [Mann–Whitney U rank-sum (2 sample)](./tst.html#fsml_ranksum)         |
| [Kruskall Wallis H test](./tst.html#fsml_kruskalwallis)               |

<br>

| Linear Procedures (LIN)                                             |
| ------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| [Principal Component Analysis](./lin.html#fsml_pca)                 |
| [Empirical Orthogonal Functions](./lin.html#fsml_eof)               |
| [Linear Discriminant Analysis (2-Class)](./lin.html#fsml_lda_2class)|
| [Ordinary Least Squares Regression](./lin.html#fsml_ols)            |
| [Ridge Regression](./lin.html#fsml_ridge)                           |
| [Mahalanobis Distance](./lin.html#fsml_mahalanobis)                 |

<br>

| Non-Linear Procedures (NLP)                           |
| ----------------------------------------------------- |
| [Hierarchical Clustering](./nlp.html#fsml_hclust)     |
| [K-Means Clustering](./nlp.html#fsml_kmeans)          |
| [Hybrid H/K-Means Clustering](./nlp.html#fsml_hkmeans)|

<br>

| Statistical Distribution Functions (DST)          |
| ------------------------------------------------- |
| [Normal PDF](./dst.html#fsml_norm_pdf)            |
| [Normal CDF](./dst.html#fsml_norm_cdf)            |
| [Normal PPF](./dst.html#fsml_norm_ppf)            |
| [Student's t PDF](./dst.html#fsml_t_pdf)          |
| [Student's t CDF](./dst.html#fsml_t_cdf)          |
| [Student's t PPF](./dst.html#fsml_t_ppf)          |
| [Gamma PDF](./dst.html#fsml_gamma_pdf)            |
| [Gamma CDF](./dst.html#fsml_gamma_cdf)            |
| [Gamma PPF](./dst.html#fsml_gamma_ppf)            |
| [Exponential PDF](./dst.html#fsml_exp_pdf)        |
| [Exponential CDF](./dst.html#fsml_exp_cdf)        |
| [Exponential PPF](./dst.html#fsml_exp_ppf)        |
| [Chi-squared PDF](./dst.html#fsml_chi2_pdf)       |
| [Chi-squared CDF](./dst.html#fsml_chi2_cdf)       |
| [Chi-squared PPF](./dst.html#fsml_chi2_ppf)       |
| [F PDF](./dst.html#fsml_f_pdf)                    |
| [F CDF](./dst.html#fsml_f_cdf)                    |
| [F PPF](./dst.html#fsml_f_ppf)                    |
| [Generalised Pareto PDF](./dst.html#fsml_gpd_pdf) |
| [Generalised Pareto CDF](./dst.html#fsml_gpd_cdf) |
| [Generalised Pareto PPF](./dst.html#fsml_gpd_ppf) |

Commit message:

clarify only fsml_* are public API

doc/api/index.md, after:

---
title: API Reference
---

# API Reference

This is a guide to FSML's public API (Application Programming Interface).


# Structure

The FSML procedures are categorised into several thematic modules:

![FSML has five thematic modules: Basic statistics (STS), hypothesis tests (TST), linear procedures (LIN), non-linear procedures (NLP), and statistical distribution functions (DST). \label{fig:fig1}](../../media/fig/modules.png){ width=40% }

- `STS`: Basic statistics for describing and understanding data (e.g., mean, variance, correlation)
- `TST`: Parametric and non-parametric hypothesis tests (e.g., Mann–Whitney U , analysis of variance)
- `LIN`: Statistical procedures relying heavily on linear algebra (e.g., principal component analysis, ridge regression, linear discriminant analysis)
- `NLP`: Non-linear and algorithmic procedures (e.g., k-means clustering)
- `DST`: Statistical distributions (e.g., Student's t distribution); probability density function (PDF), cumulative distribution function (CDF), and percent point function (PPF)

While the public interfaces do not include these as prefixes, the handbook makes use of these
categories to give it more structure. If you are interested in exploring the code, you will
recognise these in module and procedure names.

@note
Interfaces with the prefix `fsml_` are part of the public API and provided through the [[fsml(module)]] module.
@endnote


# Coverage

The following procedures are currently covered and have a public interface. The links will take you directly to the documentation for the API.

| Basic Statistics (STS)                             |
| -------------------------------------------------- |
| [Mean](./sts.html#fsml_mean)                       |
| [Median](./sts.html#fsml_median)                   |
| [Variance](./sts.html#fsml_var)                    |
| [Standard deviation](./sts.html#fsml_std)          |
| [Covariance](./sts.html#fsml_cov)                  |
| [Linear trend](./sts.html#fsml_trend)              |
| [Correlation (Pearson)](./sts.html#fsml_pcc)       |
| [Correlation (Spearman rank)](./sts.html#fsml_scc) |

<br>

| Statisical Hypothesis Tests (TST)                                     |
| --------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| [Student t-test (1 sample)](./tst.html#fsml_ttest_1sample)            |
| [Paired sample t-test](./tst.html#fsml_ttest_paired)                  |
| [Pooled t-test (2 sample)](./tst.html#fsml_ttest_2sample)             |
| [Welch's t-test (2 sample)](./tst.html#fsml_ttest_2sample)            |
| [Analysis of variance (one way)](./tst.html#fsml_anova_1way)          |
| [Wilcoxon signed-rank (1 sample)](./tst.html#fsml_signedrank_1sample) |
| [Wilcoxon signed-rank (paired)](./tst.html#fsml_signedrank_paired)    |
| [Mann–Whitney U rank-sum (2 sample)](./tst.html#fsml_ranksum)         |
| [Kruskall Wallis H test](./tst.html#fsml_kruskalwallis)               |

<br>

| Linear Procedures (LIN)                                             |
| ------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| [Principal Component Analysis](./lin.html#fsml_pca)                 |
| [Empirical Orthogonal Functions](./lin.html#fsml_eof)               |
| [Linear Discriminant Analysis (2-Class)](./lin.html#fsml_lda_2class)|
| [Ordinary Least Squares Regression](./lin.html#fsml_ols)            |
| [Ridge Regression](./lin.html#fsml_ridge)                           |
| [Mahalanobis Distance](./lin.html#fsml_mahalanobis)                 |

<br>

| Non-Linear Procedures (NLP)                           |
| ----------------------------------------------------- |
| [Hierarchical Clustering](./nlp.html#fsml_hclust)     |
| [K-Means Clustering](./nlp.html#fsml_kmeans)          |
| [Hybrid H/K-Means Clustering](./nlp.html#fsml_hkmeans)|

<br>

| Statistical Distribution Functions (DST)          |
| ------------------------------------------------- |
| [Normal PDF](./dst.html#fsml_norm_pdf)            |
| [Normal CDF](./dst.html#fsml_norm_cdf)            |
| [Normal PPF](./dst.html#fsml_norm_ppf)            |
| [Student's t PDF](./dst.html#fsml_t_pdf)          |
| [Student's t CDF](./dst.html#fsml_t_cdf)          |
| [Student's t PPF](./dst.html#fsml_t_ppf)          |
| [Gamma PDF](./dst.html#fsml_gamma_pdf)            |
| [Gamma CDF](./dst.html#fsml_gamma_cdf)            |
| [Gamma PPF](./dst.html#fsml_gamma_ppf)            |
| [Exponential PDF](./dst.html#fsml_exp_pdf)        |
| [Exponential CDF](./dst.html#fsml_exp_cdf)        |
| [Exponential PPF](./dst.html#fsml_exp_ppf)        |
| [Chi-squared PDF](./dst.html#fsml_chi2_pdf)       |
| [Chi-squared CDF](./dst.html#fsml_chi2_cdf)       |
| [Chi-squared PPF](./dst.html#fsml_chi2_ppf)       |
| [F PDF](./dst.html#fsml_f_pdf)                    |
| [F CDF](./dst.html#fsml_f_cdf)                    |
| [F PPF](./dst.html#fsml_f_ppf)                    |
| [Generalised Pareto PDF](./dst.html#fsml_gpd_pdf) |
| [Generalised Pareto CDF](./dst.html#fsml_gpd_cdf) |
| [Generalised Pareto PPF](./dst.html#fsml_gpd_ppf) |
