doc/quickstart.md, before:

---
title: Quick Start
---

# About this Guide

This guide lets you jump right into the action with minimal preparation.

@note If you already have the latest `GFortran` or `LFortran` compiler and `FPM`
, you can continue [here](./quickstart.html#get-the-code). @endnote

[TOC]


<br>
# Get the Tools

### Environment manager (recommended)

The use of [conda](https://docs.conda.io) is recommended for managing your
environment. While strictly speaking not essential, using `conda` is convenient,
clean, and a common way to manage coding environments and packages. You can get
the latest versions of all required packages from the `conda-forge`
channel. Once conda is installed, add the channel, then create a new
environment and activate it:

```
conda config --add channels conda-forge
conda create -n fsml_session
conda activate fsml_session
```

### Compilers

`FSML` supports the [GFortran](https://gcc.gnu.org/fortran/) and
[LFortran](https://lfortran.org/) open-source compilers, but it will most
likely also compile with Intel and other compilers (no compiler specific
extensions are used).

**GFortran** is a very mature and well-established compiler. Consequently, if
you're just looking for a smooth experience, GFortran
is your choice. You can install GFortran with conda as follows:

```
conda install -c conda-forge gfortran
```
**LFortran** is a new, interactive compiler that is still under heavy
development. If you're looking to use `FSML` interactively and you're
comfortable with the occasional tinkering (and bug reporting to help improve LFortran!),
LFortran is your choice. You can get LFortran with as follows:

```
conda install -c conda-forge lfortran
```
@note
LFortran is currently not an option, as it fails to compile `stdlib`.
@endnote


### FPM

The [Fortran Package Manager (FPM)](https://fpm.fortran-lang.org/) lets you
setup and manage your fortran projects easily. It is modelled after Rust's
Cargo, and many modern Fortran projects, like `FSML`, are offered as FPM
packages. The following will install FPM with conda:

```
conda install -c conda-forge fpm
```

### FORD (optional)

[FORD (FORtran Documenter)](https://forddocs.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) is a
tool that lets you document your Fortran code easily. `FSML`'s documentation is
generated with FORD. If you wish to change and document the code, add
documentation, or regenerate documentation, you can get FORD with conda:

```
conda install -c conda-forge ford
```
To generate `FSML`'s documentation, navigate to the folder containing `doc.md` and
simply run:

```
ford doc.md
```

<br>
# Get the Code

### Download and build with FPM

If you use `FPM`, you will not have to download the code manually. Instead, it
can be listed as a dependency and will be downloaded and compiled automatically
(see next section).

### Download manually

If you prefer to compile or use `FSML` any other way, you can directly [download the source code](https://github.com/sebastian-mutz/fsml/archive/refs/heads/master.zip) or visit the [GitHub repository](https://github.com/sebastian-mutz/fsml).


<br>
# Project Setup

This guide assumes you already know how to set up a project with `FPM`. See the [FPM tutorial](https://fpm.fortran-lang.org/tutorial/index.html) for more details if you need an introduction to fpm - it's quick and easy to learn!

### Step 1: Create a new Fortran project

Create new project:

```
fpm new fsml_project
```

This will create a git repository with the `FPM` standard layout.

### Step 2: Add FSML to your project

In your fpm project toml file, add the following lines:

```toml
[dependencies]
stdlib = "*"
fsml = { git = "https://github.com/sebastian-mutz/fsml.git" }
```

Include `FSML` in your fortran project just like you would include any other Fortran module:

```Fortran
use fsml
```

Now you have access to all the `FSML` interfaces. See the [API reference](./api/index.html) for a complete overview of interfaces.

### Step 3: Run your project

Run your project by executing the following from your `FPM` project folder:

```
fpm run
```

This will compile fsml alongside your own project and execure the programme! By default, it will use the `GFortran` compiler. If you want to use `LFortran` instead, run:

```
fpm run --compiler lfortran
```

### Watch your precision!

`FSML` uses double precision (real64) by default, but can be switched project-wide by changing the working precision (wp) in the `fsml_ini` module. The data type in your `FSML` application should match this. If you are happy using real64 (recommended), make sure you import it and declare your reals accordingly:

```Fortran
use iso_fortran_env, only: real64
real(real64) :: my_variable
```

<br>
# Examples

### Statistical Distribution Functions

The example below demonstrates the use of pdf (probability density function), cdf (cumulative distribution function), and ppf (percent point function/quantile function) procedures for different statistical distributions.

```fortran
program fsml_distributions
  use fsml
  use iso_fortran_env, dp => real64
  implicit none

  ! exponential pdf (x=0.8)
  print*, fsml_exp_pdf(0.8_dp)

  ! left-tailed p-value for normal distribution with specified mean and standard deviation
  print*, fsml_norm_cdf(2.0_dp, mu=0.3_dp, sigma=1.3_dp, tail="left")

  ! genrealised pareto distribution cdf
  print*, fsml_gpd_cdf(1.9_dp, xi=1.2_dp, mu=0.6_dp, sigma=2.2_dp, tail="left")

  ! chi square distribution ppf
  print*, fsml_chi2_ppf(0.2_dp, df=10, loc=2.0_dp, scale=1.2_dp)

end program fsml_distributions
```

### Statistical Tests

In the example below, we create 2 data vectors and demonstrate how to conduct a range of statistical tests on them. We then let the programme output the test results in a clean format. The commented values are the expected output.


```fortran
program fsml_tests
  use fsml
  use iso_fortran_env, dp => real64
  implicit none

  integer , parameter :: n1 = 10, n2 = 13
  real(dp), parameter :: mu = 1.25_dp
  real(dp), parameter :: x1(n1) = [1.10_dp, 1.02_dp, 1.12_dp, 2.01_dp, 1.92_dp, 1.01_dp, 1.10_dp, 1.26_dp, 1.51_dp, 1.01_dp]
  real(dp), parameter :: x2(n2) = [2.10_dp, 1.02_dp, 1.22_dp, 1.05_dp, 0.95_dp, 1.02_dp, 2.00_dp, 1.05_dp, 1.12_dp, 1.20_dp, 1.12_dp, 1.01_dp, 1.12_dp]
  real(dp)            :: t, p, df

  ! 1-sample t-test
  call fsml_ttest_1sample(x1, mu, t, df, p, h1="two")
  write(*,'(A,F10.4)')   "  test statistic (t): ", t
  write(*,'(A,F10.4)')   "  degrees of freedom: ", df
  write(*,'(A,F10.4)')   "  p-value:            ", p
  ! test statistic (t):     0.4672
  ! degrees of freedom:     9.0000
  ! p-value:                0.6514

  ! 2-sample pooled t-test (assume equal variances)
  call fsml_ttest_2sample(x1, x2, t, df, p, eq_var=.true., h1="two")
  write(*,'(A,F10.4)')   "  test statistic (t): ", t
  write(*,'(A,F10.4)')   "  degrees of freedom: ", df
  write(*,'(A,F10.4)')   "  p-value:            ", p
  ! test statistic (t):     0.4862
  ! degrees of freedom:    21.0000
  ! p-value:                0.6319

  ! 1-sample Wilcoxon signed rank test
  call fsml_signedrank_1sample(x1, mu, t, p, h1="two")
  write(*,'(A)') "> 1-sample Wilcoxon signed rank test"
  write(*,'(A,F10.4)')   "  test statistic (w): ", t
  write(*,'(A,F10.4)')   "  p-value:            ", p
  ! test statistic (w):    27.0000
  ! p-value:                0.9594

  ! 2-sample Wilcoxon Mann-Whitney U rank sum test
  call fsml_ranksum(x1, x2, t, p, h1="two")
  write(*,'(A)') "> Mann-Whitney U rank sum test"
  write(*,'(A,F10.4)')   "  test statistic (U): ", t
  write(*,'(A,F10.4)')   "  p-value:            ", p
  ! test statistic (U):    59.5000
  ! p-value:                0.7330

end program fsml_tests
```

Commit message:

caveat section (mentions naive summation)

doc/quickstart.md, after:

---
title: Quick Start
---

# About this Guide

This guide lets you jump right into the action with minimal preparation.

@note If you already have the latest `GFortran` or `LFortran` compiler and `FPM`
, you can continue [here](./quickstart.html#get-the-code). @endnote

[TOC]


<br>
# Get the Tools

### Environment manager (recommended)

The use of [conda](https://docs.conda.io) is recommended for managing your
environment. While strictly speaking not essential, using `conda` is convenient,
clean, and a common way to manage coding environments and packages. You can get
the latest versions of all required packages from the `conda-forge`
channel. Once conda is installed, add the channel, then create a new
environment and activate it:

```
conda config --add channels conda-forge
conda create -n fsml_session
conda activate fsml_session
```

### Compilers

`FSML` supports the [GFortran](https://gcc.gnu.org/fortran/) and
[LFortran](https://lfortran.org/) open-source compilers, but it will most
likely also compile with Intel and other compilers (no compiler specific
extensions are used).

**GFortran** is a very mature and well-established compiler. Consequently, if
you're just looking for a smooth experience, GFortran
is your choice. You can install GFortran with conda as follows:

```
conda install -c conda-forge gfortran
```
**LFortran** is a new, interactive compiler that is still under heavy
development. If you're looking to use `FSML` interactively and you're
comfortable with the occasional tinkering (and bug reporting to help improve LFortran!),
LFortran is your choice. You can get LFortran with as follows:

```
conda install -c conda-forge lfortran
```
@note
LFortran is currently not an option, as it fails to compile `stdlib`.
@endnote


### FPM

The [Fortran Package Manager (FPM)](https://fpm.fortran-lang.org/) lets you
setup and manage your fortran projects easily. It is modelled after Rust's
Cargo, and many modern Fortran projects, like `FSML`, are offered as FPM
packages. The following will install FPM with conda:

```
conda install -c conda-forge fpm
```

### FORD (optional)

[FORD (FORtran Documenter)](https://forddocs.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) is a
tool that lets you document your Fortran code easily. `FSML`'s documentation is
generated with FORD. If you wish to change and document the code, add
documentation, or regenerate documentation, you can get FORD with conda:

```
conda install -c conda-forge ford
```
To generate `FSML`'s documentation, navigate to the folder containing `doc.md` and
simply run:

```
ford doc.md
```

<br>
# Get the Code

### Download and build with FPM

If you use `FPM`, you will not have to download the code manually. Instead, it
can be listed as a dependency and will be downloaded and compiled automatically
(see next section).

### Download manually

If you prefer to compile or use `FSML` any other way, you can directly [download the source code](https://github.com/sebastian-mutz/fsml/archive/refs/heads/master.zip) or visit the [GitHub repository](https://github.com/sebastian-mutz/fsml).


<br>
# Project Setup

This guide assumes you already know how to set up a project with `FPM`. See the [FPM tutorial](https://fpm.fortran-lang.org/tutorial/index.html) for more details if you need an introduction to fpm - it's quick and easy to learn!

### Step 1: Create a new Fortran project

Create new project:

```
fpm new fsml_project
```

This will create a git repository with the `FPM` standard layout.

### Step 2: Add FSML to your project

In your fpm project toml file, add the following lines:

```toml
[dependencies]
stdlib = "*"
fsml = { git = "https://github.com/sebastian-mutz/fsml.git" }
```

Include `FSML` in your fortran project just like you would include any other Fortran module:

```Fortran
use fsml
```

Now you have access to all the `FSML` interfaces. See the [API reference](./api/index.html) for a complete overview of interfaces.

### Step 3: Run your project

Run your project by executing the following from your `FPM` project folder:

```
fpm run
```

This will compile fsml alongside your own project and execure the programme! By default, it will use the `GFortran` compiler. If you want to use `LFortran` instead, run:

```
fpm run --compiler lfortran
```

# Caveats

## Precision: `real` kinds

`FSML` uses double precision (real64) by default. It is written to allow the user to change `real` precision project-wide by changing the working precision (wp) in the `fsml_ini` module. However, since it uses `stdlib`'s linear algebra procedures that are are currently only available for double precision, `FSML` is limited to the same kind. The data type in your `FSML` application should match this. Make sure you import it and declare your reals accordingly:

```Fortran
use iso_fortran_env, only: real64
real(real64) :: my_variable
```
## Precision: use of intrinsics

`FSML` uses the intrinsic `sum` function, which uses the naive summation method. While this is perfectly suitable for most research applications, it is more prone to accumulating rounding errors than Kahan summation, for example. For specific applications and data types, it can create problems. Caution is advised.

## LFortran support

`FSML` is developed to support compilation with the LFortran compiler. However, `FSML` uses several `stdlib` procedures, so the successful compilation of `FSML` is conditional on the successful compilation of `stdlib`. Since both are still under heavy development, this may fail at times. If reliability is a priority for your project, it is recommended that you use `gfortran` instead (for now).

<br>
# Examples

### Statistical Distribution Functions

The example below demonstrates the use of pdf (probability density function), cdf (cumulative distribution function), and ppf (percent point function/quantile function) procedures for different statistical distributions.

```fortran
program fsml_distributions
  use fsml
  use iso_fortran_env, dp => real64
  implicit none

  ! exponential pdf (x=0.8)
  print*, fsml_exp_pdf(0.8_dp)

  ! left-tailed p-value for normal distribution with specified mean and standard deviation
  print*, fsml_norm_cdf(2.0_dp, mu=0.3_dp, sigma=1.3_dp, tail="left")

  ! genrealised pareto distribution cdf
  print*, fsml_gpd_cdf(1.9_dp, xi=1.2_dp, mu=0.6_dp, sigma=2.2_dp, tail="left")

  ! chi square distribution ppf
  print*, fsml_chi2_ppf(0.2_dp, df=10, loc=2.0_dp, scale=1.2_dp)

end program fsml_distributions
```

### Statistical Tests

In the example below, we create 2 data vectors and demonstrate how to conduct a range of statistical tests on them. We then let the programme output the test results in a clean format. The commented values are the expected output.


```fortran
program fsml_tests
  use fsml
  use iso_fortran_env, dp => real64
  implicit none

  integer , parameter :: n1 = 10, n2 = 13
  real(dp), parameter :: mu = 1.25_dp
  real(dp), parameter :: x1(n1) = [1.10_dp, 1.02_dp, 1.12_dp, 2.01_dp, 1.92_dp, 1.01_dp, 1.10_dp, 1.26_dp, 1.51_dp, 1.01_dp]
  real(dp), parameter :: x2(n2) = [2.10_dp, 1.02_dp, 1.22_dp, 1.05_dp, 0.95_dp, 1.02_dp, 2.00_dp, 1.05_dp, 1.12_dp, 1.20_dp, 1.12_dp, 1.01_dp, 1.12_dp]
  real(dp)            :: t, p, df

  ! 1-sample t-test
  call fsml_ttest_1sample(x1, mu, t, df, p, h1="two")
  write(*,'(A,F10.4)')   "  test statistic (t): ", t
  write(*,'(A,F10.4)')   "  degrees of freedom: ", df
  write(*,'(A,F10.4)')   "  p-value:            ", p
  ! test statistic (t):     0.4672
  ! degrees of freedom:     9.0000
  ! p-value:                0.6514

  ! 2-sample pooled t-test (assume equal variances)
  call fsml_ttest_2sample(x1, x2, t, df, p, eq_var=.true., h1="two")
  write(*,'(A,F10.4)')   "  test statistic (t): ", t
  write(*,'(A,F10.4)')   "  degrees of freedom: ", df
  write(*,'(A,F10.4)')   "  p-value:            ", p
  ! test statistic (t):     0.4862
  ! degrees of freedom:    21.0000
  ! p-value:                0.6319

  ! 1-sample Wilcoxon signed rank test
  call fsml_signedrank_1sample(x1, mu, t, p, h1="two")
  write(*,'(A)') "> 1-sample Wilcoxon signed rank test"
  write(*,'(A,F10.4)')   "  test statistic (w): ", t
  write(*,'(A,F10.4)')   "  p-value:            ", p
  ! test statistic (w):    27.0000
  ! p-value:                0.9594

  ! 2-sample Wilcoxon Mann-Whitney U rank sum test
  call fsml_ranksum(x1, x2, t, p, h1="two")
  write(*,'(A)') "> Mann-Whitney U rank sum test"
  write(*,'(A,F10.4)')   "  test statistic (U): ", t
  write(*,'(A,F10.4)')   "  p-value:            ", p
  ! test statistic (U):    59.5000
  ! p-value:                0.7330

end program fsml_tests
```
